hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for 2024 beginning in early
February and running through June Tammy
and I an assortment of special guests
are going to visit 51 cities in the US
you can find out more information about
this on my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye that's an ancient u connection
in the tradition to connect job and
Jesus and he is associated appropriately
with job because what Jesus Takes on is
precisely that because it's not just
suffering it's suffering that's
undeserved it releas you know for the
most part undeserved and you as a
therapist I have a priest we've met job
a number of times I mean I know in my
pastoral work people that are in that
kind of of suffering what God helps job
to see is he's trying to break job out
of this curvatus Inay my little
Consciousness that is has this
overweening
[Music]
Pride hello everybody I had the pleasure
today of speaking with Bishop Robert
Baron and I've spoken with Bishop Baron
a number of times before sometimes with
John Veri sometimes with Jonathan Pou
sometimes Alone um in all sorts of
different places including Rome we've
developed uh a good relationship and
he's a very interesting religious
thinker in my estimation he's contending
with the core meanings of the narratives
that sit at the base of our culture and
that for better worse sometimes both
unite us fundamentally and most
profoundly for for better we talk today
about I suppose the it's something
approximating the undeniable reality of
the Divine or the sacred even by
definition we tried to lay out a mode of
conceptualizing the the proposition that
there is a highest and uniting value
which I would what would you say
allegiance to that highest and Eternal
value is something like Faith it's
something like Covenant it's something
like the proper aim of life it's
something like the proper aim of life in
so far as your life is Meaningful and
generous and productive all of that by
definition we laid out the modern
understanding of that and how the church
at least in part has deviated from its
obligation and responsibility
to explain the nature of that
relationship and to help people
understand why it needs to be primary so
so that's where the discussion will go
um join
us all right so let me share some of my
thoughts with you it'll be kind of a
lengthy introduction to our discussion
but there's been some very exciting
technical developments that actually
Bear surprisingly on the religious
question so I'll give you I'll give you
one example so one of my former students
who's now working with me has been using
large language models to investigate the
concept of
God now one of the things that Sam
Harris one of the criticisms that Sam
Harris and the atheists in general have
levied at thinkers like myself and
thinkers let's say like Carl Yung this
is also a postmodern critique is that
the interpretation of a given narrative
is arbitrary that you can read into a
narrative anything you want and that
there's no you might say intrinsic
meaning in the text now there's actually
that's actually wrong and we all we we
actually know why now and we can
actually demonstrate that it's wrong and
I have no idea what the ultimate
significance of that will be but let me
let me tell you why because this is
really quite
fascinating
so we know that some words are more
similar than others and then you might
say well what makes words or concepts
similar and the answer would be
something like
substitutability or you could think
about it as so substitutability with
regard to a purpose it's a very critical
and strange definition of similarity but
also proximity in the space of
meaning and then you might say well what
does it mean for things to be proximal
in the meaning space and it means likely
to
co-occur now this student I'm referring
to his name is Victor Swift by the way
he's been able to show and this is
essentially mathematically a conceptual
overlap between 10 Concepts and the
concept of God so so imagine this bishop
Baron imagine this
that you that every concept has a
center okay so the concept of God the
center of the concept of God would be
God
but then imagine that there's a cloud of
immediate associations around that
concept and that those associations are
the concepts that are statistically most
likely to co-occur with that concept
okay so this is a this is something
approximating a mathematical fact has
nothing to do with subjective opinion so
then you could imagine and we're trying
to map this that you have God in the
center and then close to that would be
the true the Beautiful and the good and
then there'd be another cloud of
associations around that that would be
second order associations now yeah the
way a large language model works is that
it it actually learns those
associations at multiple levels
of comparison
simultaneously so it actually Maps out
what you might describe as the semantic
space or the space of meaning now so
this would also in this would also imply
this is where it gets so cool so imagine
if we took a cloud of Concepts that
people universally recognized as good so
you could imagine that you and me and
Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins would
have a fair amount of agreement on what
those goods were you know individual the
Dignity of the individual the idea of
the good the idea of the true the idea
of the beautiful the idea of upward
striving okay now imagine that that
makes a conceptual cloud
mhm there's going to be a center of that
cloud yeah that constitutes the reason
for the similarity of the ideas and it
looks to me like semantically speaking
so in terms of our verbal content this
might also be true with regards to the
stories we tell that the central concept
around which all Goods rotate is
indistinguishable from the semantic
representation of God and it also looks
like we can now map that so I think we
can dispense entirely with the criticism
that the interpretation of say biblical
narratives has to be something arbitary
and we can also make the case which Carl
Jung made to begin with is that in any
system of value that's coherent there's
going to be a central factor that
accounts for its coherence and it's
certainly the case it's highly probable
that that's indistinguishable from the
concept of God that's how it looks it's
so that's so cool because this is
starting we're starting to be able to
use this technology to dispense with
opinion so you know Yung said go called
or uncalled God is present God is there
now right right and I don't remember who
he derived that from but that was what
he had carved on his castle at bingin
but but that's that's the same idea
right that implicit in a semantic
landscape is a is the central concept of
the highest ideal that's kind of like
the sum of botom so I'm just wondering
well what you might be thinking about in
relationship to that possibility yeah
there's so much there there's questions
of hermeneutics and questions of
metaphysics and questions of psychology
and that you know I'm I'm against the
postmoderns who want to unravel the self
first of all there's no really coherent
self that does this judging and
analyzing there's also they they want to
unravel metaphysics and what you're
arguing there in a more sort of semantic
way is that there is a coherence to the
self there is a coherence to the
metaphysical structure of the real so to
use an example of of God yes uh we would
say that God is not a being but being
itself so the famous answer given to
Moses right osum quum I am who I am
Moses is asking what kind of being are
you he's trying to put God in
categorical terms and and the answer
there is so important because that makes
all the difference when it comes to
understanding religious language is if
we follow Moses and his question we we
will inevit end up in atheism because if
you think God is a categorical object in
the world eventually you'll say well I I
don't see this object and there's no
evidence for it and I can explain the
world without it so that's why the
answer of God in in Exodus is so
powerful because he's saying dumb
question wrong question I'm not a thing
in the world that you can name I am who
I am which means I'm the Prius that's
Augustine's language I'm prior to
thought and to Lang
I'm prior to being I'm that upon which
the categorical realm depends so right
from that if you get God is is as ainus
says the active to be itself so says God
is Not enum highest being but ipsum
right to be being right so if you say
that well then right away you you've got
the central organizing principle of of
all reality and that everything else has
to Cluster around which is why we speak
about God as being the creator of all
things but also your your semantic point
about the the good and and the beautiful
and so on the true we call those the
transcendental properties of being
wherever you find being you find those
things therefore they are they are
closely related to the central idea of
God and which is precisely why in the
spiritual order we get at God through
those Avenues through the true and the
good and the Beautiful it's you know
there's there's our friend James Joyce
you know when you you see the beautiful
girl off the the beach and and you take
in her beauty what that leads you to as
Steven Deus says is oh Heavenly God you
know so that's the the platonic path
that Joyce you know so that's the that's
the clustering of those ideas tightly
around God and then to your point about
uh about stories I think that's really
important because I don't agree with the
postmodern kind of unraveling of
narrative and it's simply a matter of
subjective opinion it's just the reader
response see what tells against that as
you well know is this ancient tradition
of a coherent reading of these texts I
mean why is it that that people over now
Millennia have read these texts and
found very deep and consistent uh ideas
is because they have a semantic
structure which is dependent upon a
metaphysical structure which gives rise
to a spiritual transformation uh they're
classic text for that reason and we
shouldn't simply read them as oh they're
just this you know coming together of
words and I can read any old way I want
to well no the whole of of human um
interpretive history tells against that
so I I think we do have to battle the
postmodern ultimately nihilism
metaphysically and the sort of
indifferentism at the level of of um
interpretation no no these are classic
texts that have spoken for very good
reason I think I actually think that
that battle is over because I think the
large language models are going to
demolish their pretentions so here so
imagine this here's the way of two
things so why did God disappear die
let's say and and the psychoanalyst
believed that God sunk into the
unconscious that was yung's Proposition
that if God dies formally all that
happens is that the the prime factor
becomes unconscious so imagine this this
is how you could think of that
technically so imagine
now you have your cloud of Concepts so
with the central factor of the good
itself and maybe the essence of being
itself being by definition this is by
definition by the way that's what God is
and when there's a concordance between
the religious explicit religious belief
and that implicit network of meaning you
have a conscious God at the center like
you're conscious of that God but then if
you dispense with that Central uniting
proposition you don't eradicate the
commonalities between what is good
you just you just let them sink back
into implicitness and that seems to me
to be equivalent to The Descent of God
into the unconscious that's the same
thing as jepetto for example going down
into the belly of the whale is that now
God becomes implicit right but that
doesn't mean that he's not there he's
still coded in the relationship between
those things that are meaningful okay so
that's that's pretty wild and then with
regards go ahead if I can just jump in
What happened to God The Disappearance
of God is a function of this mis
interpretation of God as a being and we
can see when that happened it happened
by the late Middle Ages when acinus is
more analogical metaphysic gave way to
unival conception of being that's in
people like William of akam and when
that happens see God is still there but
God is now one being among many God's
the Supreme instance of the category
being well all right in the late Middle
Ages is God's still there we take him
seriously but now move forward as God is
seen as a being among many he becomes
more and more um distantiated more and
more irrelevant to the world and then in
early modernity he becomes a rival to
the world and it has to be that way if
you and I are were sort of plotted on
the same mathematical grid we're going
to be to some degree over and against
each other we'll be battling for the
same space so God and Humanity are in
the same same grid both beings one's
smaller one's bigger but they're of
course going to come into conflict now
look read a lot of the early moderns
that way then keep going and you come
right up to the atheists who finally say
look I've had it with this being I don't
want this big being interfering with my
freedom and my self- defin now you've
got Jean Paul sard right is if if God
exists I can't be free but I am free
therefore God doesn't exist that I would
argue is in the mind of almost every
teenager in the west today that idea God
is a rival to my freedom but you know
this how repugnant all of that is to the
Bible right in fact this morning in my
office so as a priest I pray the the
Liturgy of the Hours every day and we
had the passage from Isaiah and it says
this Lord you have accomplished all we
have done it's a little line but it'll
take your breath away if you get it Lord
you have accomplished all we have done
we've done it but but you accomplished
it the implication there is God is not a
rival to our thought or to our action or
our achievement in fact the glory of God
is a human being Fully Alive as St erus
said see that's what modernity begins to
have a problem with and when you follow
that trajectory you get all the way
right to the atheist who say well I I
don't I don't want this big being
interfering with my life and my
accomplishment and then we'll go back to
something we've both talked about a lot
the burning bush
right which is on fire but not consumed
and that's a Biblical imagination when
God comes close to the world the world
is Luminous and beautiful compelling and
it's not consumed it's not destroyed by
the Divine
proximity that's the biblical idea that
was compromised by late the late Middle
Ages became exaggerated in the modern
period and then comes to full fruition
with the atheist so whether it's forbach
or Sam Harris it's a very Sim problem
and they're not getting seems to me the
biblical understanding of the the
non-competitiveness of God with the
world but that comes from this idea of
God as to be itself not a being right I
think all of that's the Deep
metaphysical background for what we're
dealing with today y okay so let's go I
want to go two places with that I want
to investigate the burning bush more and
I want to talk about the the fall yeah
and it's okay so with regard to the
burning bush so I've been working on
this new book we who wrestle with God
and I've been trying to map out the
semantic space I think that's a
reasonable way of thinking about now
it's not only semantic because it's also
the space of the imagination and it's
also the space of the cultural
Traditions that unite us because the
monotheistic hypothesis is something
like there's an underlying Unity rather
than a diversity or a plurality and that
that will make itself manifest at the
behavioral at at the level of the imagin
and at the level of the semantic
simultaneously right there's going to be
this is also why the postmodernists are
wrong because they think meaning is only
encoded in the semantic space and that's
not true like a a story is not precisely
semantic like a parable because it draws
on the power of the image as well as on
the power of the word and those images
are related to behaviors okay in any
case what seems to happen in the burning
bush story so imagine this is that Moses
is is attracted by something something
calls to him okay and so that's like a
beckoning or a promise now the way that
that works neurophysiologically is that
we're always looking for things that
beckon and call as indicators of the
path to treasure even bees do this by
the way like this is very very deeply
embedded inside living creatures and so
there'll be things that call to us now
the and attract our attention and pull
us off our current path which is exactly
what happen happens to Moses and this
happens to him near Mount Si which is
the connection between the Earthly and
the Divine the two Dimensions right and
exactly the this vertical Dimension and
so Moses pursues this thing that
glimmers and gleam gleams and compels
him and he pursues it right to the
bottom and as he gets closer and closer
to the core concept let's say so that
would be the core idea in this web of
meaning he starts to understand that
he's on sacred ground
right right right so then he becomes
even more humble he he he lessens
himself more exactly exactly exactly the
shoes I was think the shoes mean you're
in command if you have shoes on you can
walk anywhere you want to go and if if
it's rocky soil or it's it's a it's a
incline whatever you can walk you take
your shoes off you're much more
vulnerable and you're much more humble
you have to be you can also feel the
ground better you know and you can
imagine that that as you're approaching
the sacred you don't want to have
anything between you and the sacred
because you want to feel out where
you're going okay right yes and that
only happens through humility and right
you're close to the Earth uh so humility
is not like you know right it's not like
degradation it's just getting close to
the Earth and if you got your shoes on
in that kind of aggressive sense of I'm
going to go and look and I'm going to
examine you're not humble enough to get
in touch with the
sacred when did we decide to stop
upholding Free Speech as a basic right
it doesn't matter what your politics are
or who you voted for everyone should
have the right to express themselves
freely sadly the big Tech Monopoly has
instead opted for silencing tactics and
sensorship to fight back against big
Tech control of the internet I use
expressvpn have you ever wondered how
free to access Tech Giants make all
their money by tracking your searches
video history and everything you click
on they build a profile of you and then
sell it off to the highest bidder when
you use the expressvpn app on your
computer or phone the software hides
your IP address from third parties that
makes your activity more difficult for
companies to trace and sell to
advertisers and helps keep your online
presence more Anonymous expressvpn
encrypts 100% of your network data to
protect you from eavesdroppers and cyber
criminals so let's stop allowing big
Tech to revoke our rights to free speech
why not revoke their right to your data
instead secure your internet with the
VPN I trust for online protection visit
expressvpn.com Jordan that
expressvpn.com Jordan for three extra
months free expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan right right right right well you
and you can imagine that it has to be
the antithesis of Pride because pride is
perhaps the cardinal sin I mean it Vis
with resentment and deceit I would say
but it's certainly up there okay so
Moses allows himself to be transformed
and compelled in this interaction with
what calls to him then the voice of the
voice underlying being itself reveals
itself to him right the essence of being
let's say or the it's it's it's more
than that just
as the truth is not instantiated in the
given truth as you pointed out the
principle of being is not in okay so
that's what Moses gets in touch with but
then so what's very cool there is that's
also now that his now that he's grounded
in the right place or now that he's
established a proper relationship with
the transcendent an ineffable ideal he
now becomes the man who's capable of
fighting against tyranny and destroying
slavy exactly and despite his
inadequacies right because he still
can't speak he's he's right so it
doesn't matter the the message there is
regardless of your of the limitations
that have been imposed upon you by fate
and Circumstance if you delve deep
enough if you follow your calling with
sufficient Integrity you'll reach you'll
form a relationship a covenantal
relationship with that which underlies
being itself and that will make you the
leader capable of eternally opposing
tyranny and leading people out of
slavery yeah I think all that is right
you see you become a vehicle of of love
you become a vehicle of Grace if you
open yourself to the Transcendent
mystery you open yourself to God and the
ego has has stopped its its blockage so
the the ego's you is always obsessed
with wealth pleasure power and honor
says aquinus so if I got those things in
the way then my ego is is seeking those
all the time and they're not bad in
themselves but they're not the summum
bonum and so when I seek all that stuff
and I become addicted to them then then
I
block others access to the sacred
through me so I I I become a block to
the sacred rather than a vehicle for it
the Saints are those who right have
taken off their shoes they know they're
on Holy Ground they understand they've
come to understand and then God can act
through them and now Isaiah again you
have accomplished all we have done that
happens when you're in touch with the
sacred as long as God is construed as a
competitive Supreme Being that language
makes no sense I'd have to say no no
look Lord I'm going to do it I'm going
to accomplish it and you know thanks for
your inspiration but I'll keep you at a
distance or at the limit no no I want
you out of the picture completely I'm
going to do it but a religious cons of
all values that n spoke of and he said
that we should do that right that we
should take on to ourself the right and
even the responsibility of creating our
own values so so let me ask you about
this then in regard to
that so when God is laying out the
rights of human beings in the garden and
please correct me if you think any I've
got anything wrong here theologically
okay so God basically says to Adam and
Eve now that the garden has been created
that they can utilize the resources of
the garden as they see fit except for
one thing they can't eat of the tree of
the knowledge of Good and Evil okay so
now I've been thinking through that what
does that mean well I think it means the
same thing as taking to yourself the
ability to make any moral claim that you
want so that now you become the Supreme
Master of the moral as such okay now
what Satan offers Eve this is so
interesting because the serpent is
affiliated with Satan and Satan is the
spirit of the intellect that wants to
overthrow God it wants to put itself in
the highest place so it's something like
intellectual pretention and what the
serpent offers Eve he says this directly
is you'll become as Gods knowing good
and evil and the knowing the knowing
means master of you can take to yourself
the right to be the master of what's
good and evil okay now I would say when
people do that
they bite off more than they can shoe so
now Eve starts to conceptualize herself
as the OM omnipotent feminine that can
clutch everything to its breast right
including the poisonous snake it can
incorporate any fruit no matter how
bitter and poisonous that's her
presumption it's a presumption of Pride
and then she entices Adam and she uses
his proclivity to name and to categorize
and but what Adam what Eve Coes Adam and
says we should hearken even to the snake
even to what's most poisonous we should
incorporate even what's most poisonous
and Adam says I can do that and so you
see a twin kind of pride a feminine
Pride which is I can incorporate
everything like and clutch it to my
breast and a masculine Pride which is I
can now reshape the ordering principle
itself even to incorporate that which is
poisonous now if that's okay one more
thing on that and then tell me what you
think there is this Christian insistence
that suffering is a consequence of sin
and that's a weird one because death and
deterioration seem in some ways to be
built into the structure of existence
but it's an open
question how much our tendency to
overreach
pridefully is the consequence of our
continual suffering right because we
certainly know that when we suffer
especially when we suffer unbearably
it's often because we we' taken upon
ourselves more than we're that we have
the right to do we've exceeded our
domain of competence and I think the
false story is exactly illustrating This
Modern proclivity that we have now that
nche put forward as a a moral command
that we have to become the source of all
value now if it is the case that value
itself is encoded in the structure of
being which is certainly the case
semantically and seems to be the case in
the realm of the imagination then we
literally we literally cannot take to
ourselves the right to transv value and
establish all values without ceasing to
be human which is another inference of
the story right because though that
implicit moral order there's no
difference between that implicit moral
order and being human they're the same
thing yes no we could talk all day about
this of course but uh to your very first
point I think it's very important to
point out that the great permission
precedes the prohibition so eat of eat
of all the trees see in the church
fathers read that as God's desire that
we flourish that there's this view that
you know Christians are hung up on sin
and especially sexual sin and God is
just you know surveying us like Kim
Jong-un and you know we live in a
totalitarian come on the the great truth
of that story is the permission as God
creates this universe out of sheer
gratuitous love and then offers it to us
to to take advantage of to to pursue to
love and to enjoy so the fathers read
that as its science and art and its
politics and its literature and its
friendship and it's all the good things
of life and God says yes enjoy them in
other words it's a it's a structure of
value that's built into the being of the
created order and God says off you go
off you go enter into it but right the
one thing you can't do is pretend that
you're the Criterion of value this is
John Paul II uh reiterated this ancient
tradition in his writings um when you
become the Criterion of Good and Evil
the garden turns into a desert you get
expelled from the garden because now you
don't have the humility to enter into
the world of value you become a sort of
arbiter of value you're even a creator
of value you're the you're the evaluator
of value well then well that's the
accuser and the adversary yes well you
see because the minute you the minute
you stand apart from it in that sort of
judgmental way then you lose contact
with it that's why the garden becomes a
desert God is expelling them not out of
um he's in a snit it's just spiritual
physics it's just the way it has to go
you as you say quite rightly you stop
being human when you lose your contact
with this objective value of system and
you become the Criterion of value
because essentially you have made
yourself into God and that's in the
Bible's reading always the fundamental
problem it it just Rings the changes on
that theme that's always the fundamental
problem is we turn ourselves into gods
and what God's trying to teach us is how
joyful how wonderful becomes when you
forget that goofy pretention you
surrender in faith you know there's that
grossly misunderstood Word of Faith you
surrender in trust I I'd put it that way
in trust to the world of value at the
top of which is the summum bonum god the
source of all value and when you
surrender to that it becomes a garden
we're back into the garden you know now
fast forward all the way to Jesus you
know as God undertakes a rescue
operation to get us out of this this bad
Consciousness and to move us toward
fulfillment the fact that Jesus is
buried in a garden and then rises from
the dead out of a garden um is is not
accidental you know so that's the story
of the Bible in some ways is would you
people please get over this pretention
that you're Divine that you're the
center of of activity because then you
will be unhappy period it just happens
like night follows day well it's also
Bishop it's also very
interesting what people mean implicitly
when they say that now they are the
source of all value because that begs a
question you know I think you mentioned
that was ainus who identified wealth
pleasure power and honor so you might
say let okay so let's say that sarta
says do what thou Wilt shall be the
whole of the law that was actually
aliser Crowley right okay so but that's
that's a good statement of this
self-centeredness okay so what are the
inevitable consequences of this okay so
one of them is that you become self
conscious okay and this is what happens
to Adam and Eve right they become
self-conscious they become aware of
their own nakedness and the reason they
do that is because or the consequences
of that if if they've taken that burden
of valuation onto themselves they're
going to be self-reflective and
self-conscious we know from the
psychological literature that
self-consciousness and neurotic
suffering are conceptually
indistinguishable they they occupy the
same
space yeah and we all know that from
from experience we all know that that's
Augustine when you're KATU sin you've
turned in on yourself that's his
definition of sin but I would say of
unhappiness the ipof facto you're
unhappy and the best moments of life we
all know this are when we're least
self-conscious when we're lost in that's
when we're walking with God yes when
releas self-conscious is when we're
walking with God in the garden in the
cool of the evening right right right
right okay so now so now here's the
other flaw as far as I can tell so now
I'm going to make the proposition that I
can do whatever I want but that begs the
question as n Knew by the way what eye
are you talking about because here's
another way of thinking about it you're
going to be possessed by
something and you're either going to be
possessed by the highest thing or you're
going to be possessed by something lower
or in the worst possible case you could
be possessed by what is technically
lowest but those are that's the range of
options you're going to be possessed by
something now why would I say possessed
well it's partly because you're
socialized so okay now if the center
fragments so I think it fragments first
into sex and power and you could see the
exploration of sex with Freud and the
expl exploration of Power with nature
but the next two Gods so to speak that
are lurking under the
superordinate concept of the Divinity
are going to be something like hedonic
pleasure that would be the of
Babylon in its worst possible
manifestation and power and that would
be the Beast that you see in Revelation
with the on its back okay so that
means that when the postmodernist or the
modernist or even the liberal says I can
do what I want they fail to understand
that the that's now being referred to is
likely possession of the self by power
or Hedonism or some combination of the
two because like when you say I want
when you're angry for example I'm angry
I want to hurt this person what you're
also saying even if you don't know it is
that I am now possessed by a spirit so
it might be the spirit of vengeful anger
that has taken possession of me so
completely that I fully identify myself
with that whim and so it isn't a matter
of I versus God it's a measure of
subordinate Idol Idols it's a matter of
the competition between sub Idols that
should be properly subordinated and that
which should be put in the higher place
and one of those would be we talked
about power we talked about sex but we
could also think about that that's the
pretentious intellect it's the thing
that's most likely to possess you and
it's the thing that's most likely to
ferment Rebellion against God and that's
why Satan is referred to as luciferian
luciferian in his pretentions by people
like Milton well you're putting your
finger on something very ancient in the
in the spiritual tradition which is true
self false self and go right back to St
Paul when Paul says casually enough it's
no longer I who live it's Christ who
lives in me now notice how like Isaiah
that is right you have accomplished all
we have done you look at Paul's letter
you'd never get the sense that Paul has
somehow lost his personality I mean
Paul's personality is on every page of
his letters you can you can he's
palpable right but he can still say it's
no longer I the old self who live it's
Christ who lives in me and that doesn't
mean Christ has kicked kicked me out no
no I'm like a burning bush now I'm on
fire but I'm not consumed so it's the
false self has given way to the true
self um and that's the heart of the
spiritual tradition is when Jesus says
you know metano and we it's these
opening speech in the gospel of Mark and
we say repent you know fair enough as a
translation but literally meta noose go
beyond the mind you have so you you've
got a fallen mind and that's what you're
talking about a mind that's been
possessed by wealth or pleasure honor or
the love of knowledge whatever it is
it's an idol so metano go beyond the
mind you have believe the good news so
what he's saying is get rid of the old
self the good news is that I have come I
the Christ have come so you should be
able to say with Paul it's no longer
that old self that lives it's Christ who
lives in me there's the whole spiritual
life you know I also thought of um my
fellow motan Bob Dylan you know uh you
got to serve somebody it might be the
devil it might be the Lord and you that
sounds simplistic but it comes from the
Book of Joshua and it's dead right it's
what you just said is
we're we're possessed by something you
know it's going to be the summum bonum
or it's some some lesser good that has
turned into an idol and it's going to
start manipulating us but all you got to
do that's you know Paul tiik said that
just find out what people worship that's
all you need to know about them the rest
will follow so you got to serve somebody
so when you meet a person and they're
maybe they're they're suffering you're
as a psychologist I as a priest over the
years you deal with people who are
suffering I always that's a super
Illuminating question try to figure out
okay what are you worshiping there's
something that's the center of gravity
if it's not God that's thatc that's that
implicit god well that's what you do
when you go to a movie man is you you
take a you try to infer the aim of the
protagonist and basically by inferring
the aim you're you're inferring the
central theme around which the entire
personality rotates and there is no
difference between that and
understanding those are the same thing
okay so so okay
so as I said I've been writing this book
walking through the biblical Corpus and
so once once Adam and Eve are thrown out
of the garden you have this situation
where they have to work right they're
condemned to work and and to slog away
let's say and so work becomes integral
to adaptation now and that begs a
further question which is well what is
the best possible work what is the
greatest possible work now as far as I
can tell there's no difference between
sacrifice and work they're isomorphic
con Concepts and the reason for that is
that here's a definition of work and you
tell me what you think about this so
work is the sacrifice of the present to
the Future to the Future right now if if
you're doing it optimally it would be
the integration of the present and the
future but if it's work it's the
sacrifice okay so then the next question
is
okay what should you best
sacrifice what's the sacrifice that is
most pleasing to God well the thing we
see happening in the biblical Corpus is
that's exactly the center concern of the
next story because the story exactly and
so these are two patterns of sacrifice
proper and improper right bitter and
resentful versus upward-looking and
faithful let's say okay and the
sacrifice of Cain is motivated by Cain's
willingness to allow himself to to be
possessed by the spirit of bitterness
and resentment because that's what God
calls them out on okay so so okay so now
we could say the rest of the Bible is an
attempt to work
out the definition of the highest form
of
sacrifice now you see that being played
with across a whole array of great
stories that's the stories of the
prophet's lives let's say and the
encoding of the lessons of their lives
in the law but then you have okay now
that sort of culminates in some ways
with the story of
job right because job and the pattern of
sacrifice that's exemplified by job okay
so what happens to job is that almost
all the unjust suffering of the world is
laid on his
shoulders yeah okay and what job says
and please correct me if I'm wrong what
job says so and and job is suffering so
much and so unjustly that his wife comes
to him and says the only thing left for
you is to curse shake your fist at God
and die right and of the great figures
in the Bible exactly exactly and well
and she is she's upset by what's
happening to him and can't see a way out
now job
says she's right she's the voice of so
many today who they resent God
absolutely absolutely just Curse God and
die I mean who who needs all this
Transcendent non exactly exactly exactly
well or or the whole bloody game like
that's that's girth as mopes it's like
suffering the world is so with suffering
it would be better if the whole game
just ceased that'd be the antinatalists
right well it's a powerful argument
Curse God and die okay but job says no I
refuse to do that and I refuse to do it
on principle I'm going to assume so this
is a statement of faith I am not going
to abandon my faith in the essential
goodness of being regardless of the
proximal evidence and I'm not not going
to curse myself finally because although
I'm not a perfect man I am a good man
and so I'm not going to say that
everything that's happened to me I
deserve in some causal Manner and I'm
certainly not going to say that the
structure of being itself is corrupt now
you can think about that practically so
imagine if you're in a situation like
job's where your world has fallen apart
and maybe and maybe even genuinely to
some degree through no clear fault of
your own or no fault that could be laid
that couldn't be laid at the feet of
good men in general what's your best
strategy well I can tell you as a
clinician if you take your suffering and
you allow that to be transformed into a
resentful bitterness there's no limit to
the amount of hell you can turn anything
into right deepen your suffering right M
you multiply it immensely you know
whereas if you're suffering and you can
and you still strive to find good in
that and you still maintain maintain
your faith in the essential goodness of
being then instantly that ameliorates
your suffering to some degree it puts
you in the best possible position to
deal with it but it also helps you
embody like this supreme metaphysical
claim okay so now let's let's take that
one step further so I think you see the
full flowering of this in the story of
Christ and I mean this technically
because so the question is what suff
what sacrifice is most acceptable to God
so what work works best across all
possible situations and places and
Christ embodies the spirit
of the sacrifice of what's lesser about
the
self regardless of circumstance so
because his story is an ultimate tragedy
right because he has to face betrayal
tyranny um the collapse of his
friendships a humiliating death in front
of his mother like it is the
concatenation of all the potential
dimensions of suffering that is outlined
to some degree in job and
Christ's example is that you establish a
firm relationship with good despite all
that you continue to aim up in love and
truth despite all that and by doing so
you simultaneously transform and
transcend all that and that that's the
proper model for the highest form of
being my suspicions are that that
pattern of voluntary
self-sacrifice which is also key to
therapeutic transformation I suspect
that that pattern is isomorphic with the
good that lies at the center of the
network of conceptions of good and I
think that that's what the biblical
Revelation is is that there is no
difference between the Son and the
father that would be how you would
conceptualize that notion in religious
terms is that if the spirit of Yahweh
was properly embodied
in a human soul then it would be that
Spirit it would be the spirit of
voluntary self-sacrifice as the proper
offering to God that would Prevail and
then I would say further okay let's
think about this
as practically
and what would you say realistically as
possible we know we know this in the
therapeutic
realm the best pathway forward is to
face the things that challenge confront
and threaten you voluntarily right we
know that that is transformative we know
that that improves people's mental
health we know that it makes them braver
what you do with a person in therapy is
you find out what obstacles are standing
in their way stopping them and making
them bitter and you plot and strategize
with them about how they can decompose
that obstacle into smaller constituent
elements and face it and that's the same
thing as face faing the serpent on the
cross the the Brazen serpent on the
cross that Moses has his people do when
they're stred in the desert right heals
them it's
the what bites them it's the phacos
you've just touched on pretty much every
major theme in metaphysics and theology
in that in that last uh bit and there's
so much there Jordan we you talk about
um you know for the the job thing that's
an ancient u connection in the tradition
to connect job and Jesus and job of
course the end of the book saying I know
that my redeemer lives I mean even even
in the midst of his great suffering and
then Jesus himself who is the Redeemer
in person and he is associated
appropriately with job because what
Jesus Takes on is precisely that job is
a kind of limit case of suffering
because it's not just suffering it's
suffering that's undeserved or least you
know for the most part undeserved so
it's all of that and you as a therapist
I have a priest we've met job a number
of times I mean I know I have in my
pastoral work people that are in that
kind of of
suffering metaphysically speaking at the
heart of it it seems to me is this claim
that being and good are always more
fundamental than evil and that's because
evil is best characterized as a prao
right it's a privation of the good so
evil is always parasitic upon the good
which means no matter how intrusive it
is and no matter how kind of bold it is
it it's it's parasitic it can only exist
in and through the good so as Paul would
say where sin abounds Grace abounds the
more so sin can never outpace Grace evil
can never be greater than the good and
so job his great you might say spiritual
genius is to see that is to see it now
how did he how did he come to see it he
he was he was very good in his dealings
with his friends who were kind of lousy
friends they were great for the first
seven days when they sat with him in
silence
and you and I know that too when you're
dealing with people in great suffering
often it's it's silence and solidarity
is the best thing you can do when they
start to speak that's participation in
their suffering yeah right right and
that's what's so so U helpful about a
therapeutic about it but then they start
engaging in the most kind of trite
theological uh discourse by the you know
because oh Jo you must have done
something wrong this clearly you know
it's just evil comes because you do
things wrong that's a very naive level
of spiritual um U understanding um and
it's I think it's interesting is it's
the only time in the Bible where God
upgrades people for their bad theology
because remember at the end of the story
When God Says unlike your friends who
spoke ill of me your your friends who
did not speak well of me so God is
taking the task bad Theology and the bad
theology is this silly trivial
superficial what God helps job to see is
this metaphysical truth right that that
evil is always parasitic upon the good
but also this more theological truth
that your overweening intellect is just
this little tiny teeny finite mind that
can take in a tiny swath of reality and
job did you hear about do you know about
Leviathan and Behemoth and these
creatures of mind you know about them
under the sea you can't even see them
but but they're my creatures and you
know where were you when I laid the
foundations of the world and where were
you when I sang at the Dawn and all this
is he's trying to break job out of this
curvatus Inay my little Consciousness
that is has this overweening pride no
there's no justification for what I'm
going through there's no morally U um
sufficient reason for what I'm going
through where were you you know so it's
a it's a metaphysical move if you want
and it's a theological move where job is
is broken out of that can I say a quick
thing about sacrifice because to me
that's such a central notion in the
Bible the fact that Adam is working not
just after the fall but before the fall
so he's given the task of tilling the
garden so John Paul II saw this that we
shouldn't construe work as simply a kind
of you know result of sin or a
punishment for sin work there you might
construe as As Art and Science and
philosophy and you know all these
wonderful things that are just good in
themselves and that call forth our
powers and we know what that feels like
you know when you it's it's a it's a
strain in a way to you know read a
philosophical book and enter into a
philosophical argument but it's also
it's wonderful it's not the result of
sin or the fall it's just a it's an
exercise of your powers but furthermore
this the term in Hebrew and I forget
what it is exactly but the term for the
tilling of the soil is the same term
used for the care of the temple Eden is
a is a primordial Temple which means a
place where God is rightly praised so
the summum bonum is properly aligned
with with the human mind and will and
body and that's why Eden is a
temple the expulsion from the garden is
yes into a desert but it's also an exile
from the temple um we're not praising
right now read that as a master motif of
the entire Bible what goes wrong with us
bad praise I start praising the wrong
things idolatry is the fundamental
problem and then look at the story of
the Old Testament is trying to discover
the temple again you know um Pharaoh let
my people go that they might Worship the
Lord in the desert so they might find a
place to worship and then they build the
Great Tabernacle in the desert while
they're on the Move Mount Si and so on
and then finally the the Solomon temple
in Jerusalem Jesus who says I'll tear
down that Temple and in three days
rebuild it referring to the Temple of
his body and then Paul and you members
of Christ's mystical body you're the
temple you know so that theme of how do
we bring people back to right worship a
right ordering to the summum bonum
that's the whole Bible you know now see
go back to job for a second because what
gets in the way of right worship lots of
things but one of them can be intense
suffering there's Mrs Job there's Mrs
Job Curse God and die so cursing God is
the opposite of praising God so she's
saying you know your suffering is so
intense job that just give up on this
project of praising God that's why that
that book is so pivotal because even at
this limit case of um of suffering job
doesn't Curse God he he maintains his
connection now St one one more step
because of the Jesus job
connection Jesus on the cross we say
bearing all the sins of the world that's
what you just said you know bearing all
of human suffering maintains
nevertheless his connection to the
father so it's it you might say it's
like at a Breaking Point even God my God
why have you abandoned me uh as Chester
said God becomes an atheist on the cross
you know so you're almost at a breaking
point but it doesn't break Jesus
maintains the connection with the father
that's we would say the second person of
the Trinity having United himself to
human nature bringing Humanity with him
online which is why we say the cross is
Central to worship so at the mass which
is our that's the Great temple moment
when we give God right praise we do it
by remembering the cross this is my body
given for you this is my blood poured
out for you we're going right from
Genesis through SI through job up to
Jesus up to the Temple of the church up
to someone at at Tuesday Morning mass at
6:30 it's the biblical trajectory and
it's on exactly what you're talking
about did you know a baby's heart begins
to beat at just 3 weeks at 5 weeks that
heartbeat can be heard on ultrasound and
this can sometimes be their only defense
in the womb that's where pre-born steps
in pre-born rescues 200 babies every day
from abortion simply by providing
mothers with an ultrasound after hearing
her child's heartbeat and and seeing its
perfectly formed body in the womb she's
twice as likely to choose Life by 6
weeks the baby's eyes are forming by 10
weeks a baby's able to suck his or her
thumb preborn needs our help to save
these precious lives for just $28 you
could be the difference between the life
or death of a child and if you become a
monthly sponsor you'll receive stories
and ultrasound pictures of the lives you
helped save all gifts are tax deductible
and 100% of your donation goes towards
saving babies to donate dial pound 250
and say the keyword baby that's pound
250 baby or go to pre-born
docomo that's preborn
[Music]
docomo okay okay so a couple of thoughts
associated with that so so the first
thing I would say
is work properly done so that would be
in the garden
unselfconsciously motivated by Covenant
with the highest good that becomes
play yeah yeah good right but I I I even
mean that technically like yes if you're
so imagine there is a form of work that
allows you not to sacrifice the present
to the future but to align it perfectly
okay I think that's signal by the
emergence of the spirit of play so the
kingdom of God is the Garden in which
mankind can eternally play and the play
would be musical so it would be so you
could conceptualize Heaven as an upward
moving spiral where everything is as
already is as good as you could imagine
it but it's getting better it's getting
still right ex like a piece of music
does when it unfolds it's already
perfect but it's still reaching higher
and higher Heights that's the highest
form of play this spiral upwards okay we
have an independent biological circuit
for marking the presence of that spirit
that Spirit of play okay so let let me
add one more thing to that go ahead go
ahead please well just to pull in the
symbolism of the mass then we could say
in parallel that
sacrifice properly undertaken so that
would be voluntary is indistinguishable
from celebration and then you might say
well could you get to the point where
you could celebrate the crucifixion and
then so let's let's imagine that
practically so what that would
mean is that you came to regard your
mortal vulnerability
as a blessing not merely as something
that you could hoist and and bear
because there's certainly that element
but more than that beyond that that you
would take it on as a gift you know I
saw this trip ditch in Australia that
really shocked me the central it was an
orthodox trip ditch the central panel
showed Christ in front of the
Cross
inviting and I thought oh my God you
know could you possibly have a more
perverse invitation than the invitation
to the cross and the answer to that is
obviously no because an invitation to
the Cross is an invitation to Bear the
voluntary suffering of life but more
than that even to will the encounter
with hell itself right so it's it's
literally an invitation to fully
confront the worst of all possible
realities or potentialities but then you
think okay let's be sensible about this
how the hell are you going to adapt to
your life if you shy away from mortality
and malevolence there's no way you can
have a full adaptation to life if you
hide from that shadow and so then you
might say well I can't confront it fully
because it would tear me to pieces and
destroy me but I would say no if you did
that voluntarily in faith it would
destroy sin in you it wouldn't destroy
you now if you were rif with sin that
might feel a lot like destruction but
well that's a that's a different issue
to some degree think of the um Jesus and
disciples um singing before he goes out
to The Garden of Gethsemane so we think
of the the Last Supper as simply this
kind of gravely serious thing which
indeed it was but singing before they go
out um the all the the themes of um Life
coming from the cross I think of that
great U Mosaic and the apps of s CL in
Rome you know which is the cross at the
center of it but then flowering out from
it are all these forms of life that's a
basic you know Christian intuition and
yeah even the you know the invitation
that's the tree of life isn't it right
and to and to enter into that space
spiritually of of identifying with the
crucified Lord I loved yourself about
Play Because play is a such a key idea
um go right back to Aristotle I mean
those things that are sought for their
own sake are always higher than those
sought for the sake of something else
and so the highest activities are are
forms of play they're they're good in
themselves I do them because they're
good to do you and I are engaging in
play right now you know it's a it's a
something good in itself to be talking
about ideas and and uh I'm not looking
for some right I'm not looking for
something Beyond this I oh this will
lead no no I'm right in this moment you
know um well romano guardini and the
leaders of lurgical movement early 20th
century wanted to bring forward this
idea of the mass as play the mass is the
most useless thing that we can do and I
use that language a lot it always it
always draws people up short but I say
look the mass which is outside of time
it's not meant to lead to anything else
right it's not
instrumental right and we're being drawn
into precisely the the dying and rising
of Jesus and so that's why it's the
Supreme form of play and that's why you
know I put on fancy vestments and I
incense and I put I light candles and
and we we move around in a kind of like
lurgical Dance Etc well all of that is
expressive of play uh yeah right it's a
play you know we saw that very clearly
was Chesterton who was a very playful
figure but he saw that you know that
that kids love to dress up and they love
to do well there's the mass you know we
we dress up in fancy Garb and we carry
candles around and and we sing and we
dance and so well what's the mass but a
reflection of of uh the prayer that was
in the temple in Jerusalem which in turn
they claim was meant to imitate the
dance of David before the ark as he
comes into Jerusalem so it's this it's a
playful dance that the church does at
the summit so we say the source and
Summit of the Christian Life is the
Eucharist well there's your summum bonum
right it's what it's the praise that
aligns us to the summum bonum and that's
a playful space to be in okay two two
things there so we could say that the
mass is an attempt to dramatize the
transformation of death and Hell into
play which that's a very that's a very
difficult transformation to pull off but
you could see it as a kind of ultimate
you take the worst thing possible and
that isn't just death because hell is
worse than death and if you don't
understand that you're kind of a fool
and you people might say well what's
your proof of that and I would say well
most people who are traumatized so
shattered they're Shattered by an
encounter with malevolence not an
encounter with tragedy right so
something bad happen it's yeah it's it's
yeah exactly it's right it's sort of
like purposeless bad or Worse
intentional bad right so there are
levels that are worse than death okay
now you could take death and hell you
know as sort of exemplars of the of the
of what is most unbearable and you could
transform them like the the the ultimate
alchemical Endeavor would be to
transform those into play that's the
same as finding the gold of most value
the pearl of a highest price that the
worst possible Dragon guards it's the
same thing okay so okay so so there's
that now we you talked about
concentration on the moment okay so this
is how the Sermon on the Mount looks to
me tell me what you think about this
we're going to discuss this in Our
Gospel seminar that's coming up in April
all right so essentially what Christ
does in The Sermon on the Mount is he
says Orient yourself so that you are
acting out your Covenant with God in all
matters so that has to be first and
foremost in your structure of attention
so that would be I'm here to serve
whatever is highest and that would
include my willingness to even transform
what I conceptualize as the highest as I
learn but that's my goal so our goal in
this conversation let's say to the
degree that we're doing that truly is
that we're doing nothing but trying to
pursue the truth and we're trying to do
that in the spirit of whatever's highest
we want to Foster life more abundant
let's say we want to rectify suffering
to the degree that that's possible and
we're inquiring in how to do that okay
so first of all you set your aim and the
proper aim is the highest aim always
okay now once you do that and and that
that's aligned with the desire to treat
other people as you would like to be
treated right so that's part of that
that's that iterative altruism that's
part of that structure of aiming highest
okay so then the next thing that Christ
implies is that sufficient unto the day
and so what that would mean is that if
you aim properly at the
highest then you can now Focus all your
attention with faith and productivity on
exactly what's happening right now and
if you do that with enough intensity
that will be sufficient but that's also
I would say that's also the revelation
of the kingdom of God because if you are
aiming at what's highest and you are
absolutely attending to the moment then
you're walking with go God in the
Eternal Garden you lose all your
self-consciousness you're in that state
of play that's simultaneously
transformative right and that's going to
suffuse you with a sense of sufficient
and sustaining
meaning and I think that's by the way I
think just just this might be of some
interest to you I think we actually know
how that all operates now at a
neurophysiological level like I actually
think that the neuroscience and these
theological Concepts have
converged so and you know I've talked to
a number of neuroscientists about this
not quite as explicitly as we're doing
but like it's certainly the case that
our primary positive emot emotions
system mediated by dopamine let's say
that's a treasure seeking system yeah
yeah yeah and it's definitely the case
that we feel the most positive emotion
when we see progress towards the highest
possible goal yeah that's literally how
it
works yeah and there's so much we can
say about the sermon of course and I I
agree with those instincts Jordan very
much um I think if you know it's on a
mountain so there you've got Eden was a
mountain because we know the rivers flow
out from
um Sinai is a mountain you know Calvary
is a mountain Mount tabore is a mountain
um so it's a Sermon on the Mount so and
he's a new Moses right it's where Heaven
and Earth meet and he's the new Moses
the new lawgiver but what strikes me
about it as I I read acinus on the on
the sermon is the four things he
identified as the blocks to the you know
to the flow of Grace wealth pleasure
power honor they're all taken on in the
Beatitudes you know so if wealth is your
problem how lucky you are and and the
the Greek there macaros is the word and
we say blessed or happy but they say you
could even even translated as lucky how
lucky you are if you're poor you know or
poor in spirit is in Matthew's version
uh you might say how lucky you are if
you're not addicted to uh wealth so I
mean wealth leads you down a path toward
addiction and when you you follow that
path then you block the flow of Grace if
pleasure is your problem well how lucky
are if you mourn so it's not it's not a
masochistic thing it's saying how happy
you are if you're not addicted to good
feelings because sometimes as you say
following the summum bonum means you
will not have good feelings at all just
the contrary so how lucky you are if
you're not so addicted to that that you
block the flow of Grace um let's say
Powers your your hangup well how blessed
are the
meek how blessed are those without any
particular power well read it as how
luck you are if you're not addicted to
power because power is
extraordinarily uh powerful addiction so
how lucky you are um and then honor if
honor is your hangup well how lucky you
are when people hate you prescribe your
name yeah revile you because well in
other words how lucky you are if you're
not addicted to honor because sometimes
following the summum Bona means you're
not going to be honored well then once
those four blocks once those four blocks
are out of the way then the rest follow
how blessed are the are the pure of
heart that means my heart's not divided
I'm not following this and that and
what's myum vulnerable today it's this
no I'm pure I'm single-hearted
integrated single minded right single
single-hearted and that's the the old
kirar the saint someone who who wants
one thing who desires one thing right so
the single-hearted
um how blessed are the peacemakers
because you'll become a maker of Peace
the minute you get rid of these these
blocks and Grace flows through you you
will become instead of a servant of
power yeah you you'll become actually a
peacemaker um why am I blanking on the
other ones blessed are the single
blessed are those who hunger and thirst
for righteousness that's the same thing
is what what do you hunger and thirst
for well wealth pleasure H you know or
righteousness I I hunger for one the one
thing is to do the will of God right so
the beatitude set up the basic dynamic
and then the rest of the sermon I think
reveal kind of what that life begins to
look like so to love will the good of
the other okay what's the ultimate test
because if you're if you're hooked on
you you've gotten rid of your addictions
at least to some degree and you found
purity of heart you're going to be
attached to the summum bonum whose name
is love that's what God is God is love
so now you have to live utterly aligned
to love what's the ultimate test of that
love your enemies because the enemy is
someone who's who's not going to will
your good in return because the great
temptation is I I will be kind to you or
just to you or whatever that you will be
kind and just to me so then I'm just
caught in the in the ego game you know
in a more subtle form but if I Love My
Enemy then i' I'm proving I'm I'm
willing the good of the other as other
you know so all the turn the other cheek
and the and the go the extra mile and
love your enemies um and then this will
turn into you know life increasing in
you 30 60 and hundredfold because you're
hooked on to the source of life you're
in what I've called the loop of Grace as
you receive Grace you give it as a gift
because Grace only exist that's part of
that upward spiral yeah no and I I love
that because that's very close to the
the mystics when they talk about heaven
um where ainus says that in heaven we
will see for the first time how
incomprehensible God is it's it's a
delicious formula because you think of
okay here below he's incomprehensible
but boy in heaven then I'll really see
him and acain says yeah you you will but
what you'll see is how
inexhaustibly fascinating he is because
you're going to keep spiraling upward
you know uh infinitely anyway the
anticipation of that here below is
trying to deal with these addictions
hook on to the source of of Grace enter
into the loop of Grace as you receive it
give it and then you'll get more that's
that's the physics you'll get more and
then when you get more give that away
and then you'll get more more right and
that's inexhaustible it's not a zero sum
game yeah well so this is one of the
things I've really been toying with you
know is this idea
that if and this is the faith that moves
mountains let's say or the power of the
MUSC Mustard Seed that's another way of
thinking about it is
that what is possible what is laid in
front of you in terms of its potential
is proportional to the attitude of faith
and courage that you bring to bear on
the situation and it may well be that oh
this is the proposition is that the
source of being is is literally
inexhaustible is there's nothing that it
could it could bring forth anything
conceivable and the precondition for
that is the proper is cultivation of the
proper receptive attitude so now let we
could look at how sophisticated this is
too let's take wealth for example so one
way of conceptualizing wealth is as an
evil in itself maybe that's associated
with the victim victimizer narrative and
the evils of capitalism but that isn't
what happens in the gospels because when
Christ goes after the rich man the rich
young man like he asks him a bunch of
questions before he tells him he has to
sell everything you know he says first
of all the young man says well I'm
miserable and I don't know why and
Christ says okay well let's you know
let's diagnose this are you abiding by
the principles of Moses and the young
man says well yeah you know I'm actually
pretty good at that I'm I honor my
mother and my father I I abide by the
ideal rules and and they continue that
analysis until Christ's final Revelation
is something like well look you're doing
a lot of things right apparently but
you're still miserable and what that
means is that the life you've set out
for yourself isn't working for you it's
not in accordance with the needs of your
soul and so what you may have to do is
to dispense with all of your privilege
and your security and the opportunity of
your wealth because it looks like it's
interfering with your potential
allegiance to an even higher good and
that makes the young man um I guess his
countenance Falls in some ways right
he's shocked by the idea that in order
to follow Christ to enter the true
Kingdom of Heaven that he would have to
sacrifice everything he owns and all the
disciples say well if that's the cost of
getting into heaven then you know no
one's going to pay it but but the thing
is it's not a critique of wealth and and
of itself it's a critique of the worship
of wealth as a substitute for the divine
right now you see that even more subtly
I think in the parable of the unjust
Steward because and tell me if you think
I've got this right or wrong but
basically what Christ tells the unjust
Steward who who does some shady
machinations to increase his wealth he
says something like the children of
Darkness are in some ways wiser than the
children of light and what he's implying
there is
that not only is wealth or abundance not
an evil in and of itself but if you
pursue that
diligently that's better than no
diligent Pursuit as well at at all and
that dedicated Pursuit could produce in
you the discipline that could be then
used for a higher aim right and so you
can't just casually dispense with the
with the economic realm let's say and
supplant and substitute for that the
spiritual is that these things wealth
pleasure power and honor they might not
be evils if they were put in their
proper place right if they were subd
properly okay okay no that's that's
exactly right um there's a lot we could
say there the rich young man is
fascinating for one reason it's one of
the only times Jesus seems uh to fail
like you know whenever when he calls
people oh yeah they drop everything and
they come after him and you know sure
I'll follow you and Matthew leaves his
Tas cler post and he comes after him
well the rich young man receives as
extraordinary invitation from Jesus I
mean just leave your wealth behind and
come after me and he doesn't do it which
to me is a witness to how
extraordinarily powerful the grip was on
him here's John Paul II's reading on
that um he takes him see Luther Luther
read him in the Protestant way as well
you know he just he thinks he's
following the the Commandments but I
mean no one can follow the Commandments
we we're all hopeless that's why we all
need Grace you know but John Paul in a
more Catholic way said no no I I take
the kid at his word that he's a a seeker
and you're right that he's his life is
miserable and so he's coming to the
source of good good teacher you know the
Lord said why do you call me good only
God is good but you know good good
teacher what must I do to be saved well
I'll take him in his word he wants to be
saved healed right he wants to be healed
he's knocking right he is and so Jesus
says as a as a good Jew all right are
you following the Commandments of Moses
which I would construe there as the the
fundamental and prebles of of love so
you're going to be a person of love in
lineing with god well of course you
can't be killing people and you can't be
stealing things from people you can't be
raping and you can't be you know
committing adultery and these are like
fundamental violations of Love okay and
the kid says and I'll believe him I've
kept all these since my youth all right
fair enough so you've done the basics
but now you're ready for some high
octane spirituality and what Jesus you
know clearly in itss is your big problem
is you're carrying your wealth around
like this terrible burden it's an
enormous block to the flow of Grace and
so if you're ready for the serious stuff
sell all you've got give to the poor and
come follow me and you'll have treasure
in heaven um and he's not willing to do
it which witnesses to the power of that
in that kid's life and I I've known
people like that that they they really
do want they really do want joy they
really do want God they and they're not
bad people they're doing the basic
things right they're not raping and
stealing and killing but there's some
there's some block that's so big and it
might be one of the other three you know
they're addicted to pleasure or to honor
and they can't let go of it uh and
that's all the spiritual Masters will
use that kind of language is find out
what that thing is you're carrying
around you got to get rid of it right
right right right well that's the
sacrifice of the thing you most love
that's also why Christ says in the
Gospels unless you're willing to forsake
your mother your father like everything
you can't follow me and it's a matter of
prioritization people get that wrong all
the time you know and I I love you the
treatment of of Abraham the sacrifice
the AKA right The Binding of Isaac uh oh
my goodness you know this how that what
a terrible father and and God making
that horrific demand and you know who
could believe this old nonsense and I
would have that guy arrested and come on
it's people that they're just they're
just opaque to the spiritual meaning of
of these stories the Bible is so edgy
it's such an edgy book and it doesn't
compromise so Isaac good yes it's your
son and he's the bearer of the promise
and he's all of that he's great I love
Isaac and and God says to abraam you
know Isaac yes your son uhuh whom you
love yeah yeah yeah so just that we
really clear on how good Isaac is okay I
want you to sacrifice him to me now this
this is in in the sort of coded language
of the Bible this is not God being
manipulative and cruel it's it's forcing
this question okay yes Isaac is all
those things but he's not the summum
bonum and your family is not the summum
bonum family's great and that's why
Jesus saying he the guy hey Lord I'll
follow you but you know first could I
just bury my father what you think well
of of course you can bury your father
and the Lord says Let the dead bury
their dead and there's no first there's
no other first no matter what it is you
have to be prepared at a moment's notice
no matter what's happening that's the
edgy language it's a spiritual you know
training manual in a way and it's
forcing you to come up against these
things okay so so with regard to Isaiah
like we could look at the
peda it isn't only that Abraham is
willing to sacrifice his son to God it's
that if you were a good father that is
what you would do now weirdly enough you
see what happens is that because Abraham
is willing to sacrifice Isaac he doesn't
have to and that's so cool okay so so
what you see in the figure of Mary with
the p is Mary has entered into this
Covenant with God and she's going to
fully offer her child to the world with
no reservation even if that means his
demise and torture now that is what a
mother has to do because if she isn't
willing to offer her child to the world
she is now an impediment to that child's
development so that it's only the parent
who is willing to sa to sacrifice the
child to the world who can even bring
the child into being look I mean part of
the reason that the birth rate is
plummeting this isn't the whole reason
but part of the reason is that women ask
themselves the Eternal question
is how is it ethical to bring a child
into a world such as this right yeah
right and they may be doing that locally
say well we don't have the security or
the wealth to provide what's necessary
for the child but then there's a
metaphysical question is well given that
my child will definitely suffer and
encounter evil fully how dare I presume
to to play that game with God that's
what Mary's asked to do when the angel
comes to visit her right and and so you
see this there's no higher offering than
the willingness to offer up your son to
god let's say well that's the also the
game God plays when he offers up Christ
right it's a and and it does have this
element that you described which is
off-putting to begin with but of course
you have to sacrif you have to sacrifice
you have to celebrate the sacrifice of
your child to the world you have to let
them go out there and bang up hard
against everything and that should be a
celebration and I would also say the
fact that you love your child and that
you would mourn his or her demise is
actually a testament to the fact that
that sacrificial off offering is that is
the essence of love those are the same
thing I'm just thinking of of our friend
of Carl Yung who said the first gr
psychologists were the church fathers
you know he he knew the church fathers
and saw that they grasped a lot of these
he might we call them psychological I
might call them spiritual you know
truths but one of them the connection
there is between Isaac and Jesus so the
church father's got that right away so
Abraham is called upon to sacrifice his
son but then you know his his hand is
stayed
but it anticipates the father willing to
sacrifice his son yeah right but when
all the way he didn't stop the sacrifice
and Isaac bringing the wood of the
sacrifice up the hill is an anticipation
of Jesus carrying the cross of Calvary
right right so they saw these
connections that are meant to speak the
very spiritual truth that we're talking
about right well those are connections
that I would say occupy the same
semantic space and I think we'll be able
to map those out by the way so that this
like I said it will no longer be a
matter of opinion we'll be able to
identify okay so now here's another
issue with regards let's say to the
pearl of great price that the farmer
sells everything he owns to possess well
Christ contrasts Earthly and Heavenly
treasure okay so let's imagine that
Heavenly treasure is a kind of
metaphysical treasure that that leads to
True abundance okay now you already
touched on this so okay let me let me
make this real concrete so I had this
graduate adviser at Migel Robert Peele
Robert is still alive and I still work
with him now he was a very particular
sort of Professor and I would contrast
him with another sort so whenever I went
and talked to Bob in his office he
always made time for me he was very
generous with his time all we did was
talk about potential research projects
and hypothesis and he was 100% generous
with his ideas okay so and that
generosity was manifest to his other
students but also practically speaking
so if you looked at the relationship
that Bob had with his graduate students
his students produced a lot of papers a
lot of first authorship papers many of
which were derived from an idea that Bob
had planted but he was 100% committed to
the fostering of his students
flourishing and so we had a blast in his
lap because the entire place was set up
with with his with with the students
future well-being in mind now that
redounded to his credit because he
produced many outstanding students who
went off to be professors who had
Stellar research careers so it
multiplied his effect but here's
something even cooler so his initial
proposition was that ideas Revelations
were to be given away
freely okay so let's imagine the
consequence of that so now you and I are
talking and I'm completely UN remitting
in my my willingness to share my ideas
with you okay so that's inspiring now
what I get back from you is a
corresponding enthusiasm and that's the
possession by God for you because that's
what enthusiasm means but that
enthusiasm technically is a form of
incentive reward it's what keeps the
conversation flourishing now here's the
neurophysiological consequence of that
so imagine that you have a n a network
of living tissue that is capable of
generating even scientific ideas now you
keep feeding that you feed it new
information and so forth but when it
operates because you express its
contents it meets it its seeds land on
fertile ground and it receives the
optimum response which is rewarding okay
that produces a dopaminergic response in
you that's part of the enthusiasm of the
okay here's what dopamine
does the dopamine energic system
watches monitors the pattern of
neurological activation that precedes
the receipt of the reward so imagine
that there's a network in me that is
operating just before I say something
that you respond enthusiastically to
okay that enthusiasm triggers a
dopaminergic response in me that makes
that system grow yeah yeah yeah that's
literally what happens it reinforces it
so there's a rewarding element of
dopamine and a reinforcing element so
what that means
technically in principle is that the
more you give away your ideas the more
unselfish you are in sharing your
talents or not hiding your light under a
bushel the more ideas you're going to
have and so and that okay then one more
thing then imagine that participating in
that now becomes the Heavenly treasure
because now you've tapped into the well
that's literally inexhaustible and
that's way better than just security the
other professors they would Shepherd
their ideas and you know guard them like
they were treasures and they ran out
very rapidly like their trajectory was
downward and closing and their students
didn't Thrive because they were stingy
about their treasure right can I suggest
in a way we're we're very close to the
kingdom of God here to use jesus'
language and it goes right back to the
beginning of our conversation we've been
talking about metaphysical truths and
psychological realities and spiritual
things but with this we're coming very
very close to the heart of it um John
Paul II formulated what he called the
law of the gift which is exactly what
you said the law is this your being
increases in the measure that you give
it away so it's so counterintuitive our
our sinful World teaches us exactly the
opposite all the time which is why
there's so much suffering spiritual
suffering it says no no fill up your ego
with all these the goods of the world
and then as you said Shepherd them hang
on to them defend them make sure people
know they're yours but and now there
there's The Prodigal Son uh father give
me my share of the inheritance coming to
me so three times in one sentence he
says me right give me my share coming to
me what I
deser yes and so the father symbolizes
God gives that's all the father knows
how to do right God is love that's he is
in a way like the platonic form of the
good that just knows how to give that's
all God knows how to do so he of course
he gives well then the son hanging on to
these Goods he's received fritters them
away now read that spiritually it is the
minute you turn Grace into a possession
it stops being Grace and therefore it
disappears it disappears well that's the
danger of that material wealth right
that's the transformation of the
spiritual into the merely material into
into what you possess and then that even
if it was valuable to begin with that
now becomes an impediment to your
movement forward because you're going to
cling to it right and so the discovery
has to be actually know when I give away
the grace I've received being increases
in me I get more of it now as I give
that away I get more of it now I'm in
the loop of Grace and I found exactly
what Jesus means when he says treasure
in heaven uh yes we would say after we
die and and we go to a to a higher
dimensional yes that's true but but even
now even now I can tap into treasure in
heaven and and that well that's in
eternity that's in eternity right that
treasure in heaven is the Eternal
treasure and I agree I also see again
the practicality of this like look look
we know this even there's almost nothing
that devastates a person more than the
devastation of their
reputation now there can be prideful
reasons for that but the reason that we
value reputation so highly is because it
is an element of the treasure in heaven
like if I have a social support network
if if the hearts of the people around me
in the broadest sense are filled with
Good Will to me because I've been
unstintingly generous in my provision of
the good that God is granted to me there
is nothing even possible that could best
make me more secure and provided with
opportunities because we live in this
intensely social surround I mean even
money itself even money itself is
nothing but a promisory note predicated
in the final analysis on something like
reputation and so Christ's message is
something like don't ever let the
concretizations of your reputation which
might be your money interfere with all
those actions that would redound to your
reputation in the space of Eternity and
I actually can't think of a more
practical piece of advice than that and
because the advice in some sense is well
don't subordinate the higher to the
lower even if it's a fairly High form of
high which which material wealth might
you know you might regard it exactly as
that you don't want to sacrifice you
don't want to sacrifice the source of
material wealth to the wealth itself but
but it's a tricky game that's why the
spiritual tradition is is so insistent
on some of these exercises and on the
stories that are meant to bring you up
against it so you begin to see okay
that's what's going on in my life and
yes I am that rich young man I am the
prodical son I am they they force us
into that space because we can talk
about it abstractly and and I think I've
I can say I've grasped the principle but
in terms of living the principle I mean
that's that's why I go to confession all
the time and that's why you know I'm I'm
very aware of my limitations and my
moral problems because I I need these
stories all the time I need the mass all
the time and you know the sacraments all
the time those parables in that story
you know those and the mass those are
okay first of all the Parables make the
semantic
imaginal right because because they they
they put Flesh on the bones they're like
the movie version of the explicit ethic
okay well the advantage to that is that
like if it's merely a semantic
discussion an abstract discussion it's
difficult to conjure up the appropriate
surrounding emotions but if you place it
in a story then
you can embody that and you can
participate in the emotional states that
the stories are pointing to visceral
right it's visceral that's very Jewish
it's very biblical the fact that you
know the Bible has all these truths but
very rarely articulates them in a
philosophical way so the Greek tradition
does that but the Bible a little bit The
Book of Proverbs and book of wisdom
there's some moments when it's got a
more philosophical voice but typically
no the Bible speaks in narrative
language and imagistic language
probably more accessible to People Too a
because even you know even a simple
person can go to a complex movie yes
right now they may not be able to tell
you explicitly
afterward they can't explain the
philosophical themes of the movie but
that didn't mean they didn't participate
in its
transformative they might have got the
message without being able to say it
right absolutely absolutely absolutely
over centuries not with the Bible and
even you go to those great churches in
in Italy where the whole facade of the
cathedral is biblical stories and
Biblical characters and and uh people
learn these moral truths from those uh
works of art the the tragedy now you
know as as again it's in the it's in the
hands of very ham-handed people the the
new atheist types you know that oh the
Bible's you know it's Bronze Age
mythology uh as though I'm judging the
truth of something by When It Was
Written I mean so stupid Aristotle I
don't read him because he's
pre-scientific and I wouldn't read uh
Dante give me a break and these are SE
are people that don't understand how
these texts are working and the themes
that we've been throwing back and forth
but that's where the great spiritual
tradition and look the brightest people
in the west prior to the Scientific
Revolution this is what they studied
they were they studied Soul doctoring
this is soul in the Scientific
Revolution I mean Newton is a great
example of that well sure that you mean
that they were religious themselves the
founders absolutely well I don't I
actually also don't think I don't
believe by the way I don't believe that
you can be a without being implicitly
religious and here's why well you have
to believe the world is intelligible
intelligible right you have to believe
that it's intelligible to a human being
so that there's a concordance between
its structure and our cognitive capacity
you have to believe that pursuit of that
relationship with reality is a good and
that's disputable you know like the
story like Frankenstein stories for
example are an indication of the fact
that well the pursuit of knowledge Pur
say isn't necessarily a good it has to
be oriented in the right direction or it
can be terribly dangerous I don't
believe and I see I think we're seeing
this by the way and I think that people
like Dawkins are seeing this and I know
that you know you you may have noticed
that Ian hery and Neil Ferguson and to
some degree Douglas Murray and Brett
Weinstein have all come out publicly in
the last month or two saying that they
no longer believe that the humanist
Enterprise can aim at good without being
embedded in this underlying imaginal and
metaphysical space right now some some
of them are wrestling with that to some
degree more than others Ian and Neil
Ferguson they have converted to
Christianity now Douglas Murray for his
part this is the same with Brett
Weinstein they've started to see that
the materialist atheist humanist moral
Enterprise is not sustainable it it's
going to it's going to be overcome it's
going to be overtaken by lower Spirits
right and that's partly what's happening
on the culture warfront no I think
there's a very important point and I
think it's a sign of Hope in our
situation today that people like
yourself and and many others I think are
opening up these spiritual treasures and
you know the church has got got to help
us you know we with the scandals and all
that and people tend to look at the
churches is corrupt and and then the
Bible oh yeah the Bible's old this old
book and it's bad science and all that
is that we we we ourselves sto teaching
our tradition effectively and there a
lot of reasons for that but there are
others today I think who are opening up
this tradition and and helping people
see it and that is enormously important
because I I it's bothered me immensely
that the rise of the new atheism and the
among young people the dismissal of
religion which is a very dangerous
proposition when you start bracketing
these truths and then you start living
in a hyper superficial way uh you live
in the in the buffer space you know as
Charles Taylor puts it uh that's very
dangerous ground to be honest and uh
that we need that's the ground where
where a multiplicity of malevolent
Spirits can invade your heart and
possess it unbeknownst to you and this
strange concatenation of Pride and
Hedonism that characterizes the modern
world it's so interesting how those are
so tightly alied that is the of
Babylon and the great Beast of
Revelation right it's the same idea the
Eternal the Eternal threat to mankind is
that the state will deteriorate and
become multi-headed and that female
sexuality and Hedonism will will will
deteriorate in parallel to that and that
is it's not like see this is where
Dawkins and and the new atheists are
naive they believe that you could
supplant Superstition with rationality
and first of all all of what was being
supplanted was not Superstition that's
the first thing and the second thing is
well re rationality serving what Master
well we can serve our own Master it's
like yeah you can e good luck you're
serving Satan well
that's that's how it that's how it works
out yeah no right um I mentioned Bob
Dylan earlier but you do the ignatian
exercises at a certain point you come to
this um two standards meditation and
it's simply you you're meant to imagine
two armies you know the army of Christ
the army of Satan and um which one are
you going to join and it's as simple as
that and you say oh no I I'm I don't
want to join either Army then you're in
Satan's Army uh I don't I can't decide
yet you're in Satan's Army uh I'd like
to join Christ's Army but I'm not ready
you're in Satan's Army and so Ignatius
compels you to the Bob Dylan moment you
know You' got to serve somebody here now
it's going to be the devil or the Lord
meaning it's going to be the suum bonum
or some Similac there's no other option
there's no third round and right and
coming to that point for Ignatius that's
what what the spiritual life is all
about is to is to bring yourself to that
point make that decision and then by God
live by it live according to that um to
that decision um that's an excellent
place to stop sir and we should stop
because we have to have our half an hour
conversation for the daily wire for
everyone watching and listening you can
continue to join us there and we're
going to be able to continue our
conversation at some length in April
just so everyone watching and listening
knows we're going to do a seminar on the
gospels for the daily wire akin to the
seminar did on Exodus and we're going to
have a chance to discuss this with great
thinkers at length and to walk through
all of this and it's very exciting time
because it it does appear that the the
underlying structure of the sorts of
things that we're discussing is starting
to become clearer and clearer in front
of us right that does present us with a
Starker Choice the choice that you
described so and that's at the base of
this culture War as far as I can tell
very good talking to you as it always is
thank you very much for joining Jo ing
me today thank you to all of you
watching and listening and to the
dailywire people for facilitating this
and uh we'll see you in a short couple
of months God bless you
[Music]
Jordan